---
title: The SAT Isn't That Bad
slug: sat-isnt-bad
description: "The SAT is the least bad standardized option we have."
date: 2025-11-18
---

# The SAT Isn't That Bad
### 2025-11-18

### You may have realized that the date of this post is different from the date of the original post. I am in the process of revising my writing, and I was very dissatisfied with my first draft. Thus, this post is a revised version of the original with many of the same ideas, but with (hopefully) improved prose.

In 2021, the University of California system stopped considering standardized test scores (e.g. SAT, ACT) as part of their admissions process. On November 6, 2025, UC San Diego released a [report](https://senate.ucsd.edu/media/740347/sawg-report-on-admissions-review-docs.pdf) detailing a variety of statistics, including the number of students who were below high-school level in math. Shockingly, 11.8% of domestic first-year admits needed to take remedial math to make up for missing knowledge.

More specifically, the UCs expect that students take Algebra I-II and Geometry through their [C requirement](https://admission.universityofcalifornia.edu/admission-requirements/first-year-requirements/subject-requirement-a-g.html) and demonstrate reasonable understanding of these subjects. In 2016, a course named Math 2 was created at UCSD as a remedial math course that was intended to prepare students for the standard coursework (Math 3C/Math 4C/Math 10/Math 20). This course was supposed to see a very small number of students, approximately 1% of the incoming class.

However, in Fall 2021, Math 2 saw unprecedented growth, jumping from 32 students just the year prior to 191. In the following years, the enrollment in Math 2 rose so much to the point where the system had to be reformed - Math 2 became a course to review *elementary and middle school math*, and Math 3B was created as a course to review high school math.

As of Fall 2025, 8.5% of first-year students place into Math 2 and 3.3% into Math 3B, making a total of 11.8% of first-year admits needing to take remedial math. This isn't just an isolated incident either: campuses like UC Berkeley are also observing this troubling growth.

With no standardized way to determine students' level in mathematics and English, the UCs are evidently struggling to accurately assess the preparedness of their first-year admits.

Of course, causation here is complicated. This effect could have also been caused by the COVID-19 pandemic disrupting key years in students' education. But, the key point is that without standardized metrics, detecting these issues is a lot more difficult for admissions officers.

While the title of this blog post, "The SAT Isn't That Bad", is a sweeping generalization, I'll clarify a little more. By "goodness", I am referring to the capacity of a measure to predict how college-ready a student is - in other words, how likely a student is to pass their courses and graduate from college. I am, however, *not* referring to the worth of students or their general intelligence in any way, as those are completely different labels that do not hold relevance to the topic at hand.

When discussing the SAT, the main argument against its use is the issues of bias and inequality that it shows. Students from wealthy families can afford to find an SAT tutor and prepare for months, possibly taking the SAT multiple times to maximize their score. On the contrary, students from poorer families may not be able to access these same opportunities and are thus at a disadvantage compared to wealthy students.

Although there are no evidence-backed claims for how much SAT tutoring and extensive preparation improve scores, it can be inferred that students who have access to such resources already gain an inherent advantage over other students. In fact, the [College Board website](https://satsuite.collegeboard.org/help-center/how-much-time-should-my-child-study-official-sat-practice) claims that sufficient SAT practice can lead to increases of over 100 points compared to baseline. This is clearly inappropriate for a test meant to assess college-readiness: if it can be gamed to increase points, what merit does it really have?

Furthermore, students who did not grow up speaking English as a native language are at an even greater disadvantage. A very capable student who doesn't speak very much English may score lower on the SAT than a student who is less capable but grew up speaking English. Do students deserve to be punished by the system for not growing up in North America?

Lastly, the SAT only assesses math and English skills. Clearly, these are not the only skills that are required to do well in life - what about critical thinking, creativity, abstract reasoning, and resourcefulness?

By quantifying only two very narrow skills, the SAT fails to accurately evaluate individuals on their overall preparedness for life. Rather, it rewards students who pour time into improving these two skills and who optimize to raise a number. Is this really the exam that should be used as a bar to compare students?

Despite these caveats, the SAT is still arguably the best standardized system to measure college readiness.

First, we need a standardized metric in order to best assess college applications. Without the SAT or ACT, all that differentiates students are their GPAs, activities, recommendations, and essays. Of these metrics, the only quantitative measure is high school GPA, which is notorious for being extremely unreliable. GPA can fluctuate wildly from school-to-school - one school may cap GPA at 4.0, while others allow students to achieve ridiculous GPAs like [11.84](https://www.reddit.com/r/ApplyingToCollege/comments/v02kj9/kid_from_my_old_school_district_got_a_1184_gpa/). Additionally, teachers are also inconsistent in their grading, and this isn't a problem that can be solved. A student who received an A+ in AP English under one teacher may receive a B- under a different teacher despite writing at the same level.

While some may argue that course rigor and AP exam scores could be used as metrics instead, they are inherently standardized. The curriculum of AP courses is designated and **standardized** by the College Board, and so is the grading scale for the exams. Despite being standardized metrics, they are actually worse than the SAT at ranking students due to the vague definition of "rigor" (is AP Art History a more rigorous course than AP Physics C? If not, why?) and at that point we may as well use the SAT.

Second, while it is true that international students may hold a disadvantage compared to domestic students, the SAT still does a [pretty good job](https://research.collegeboard.org/media/pdf/Value-of-SAT-Scores-in-Evaluating-International-Student-Readiness.pdf) quantifying their college readiness. International students' GPAs in college very closely resembled the mean among their SAT score band, suggesting that they aren't bad predictors at all. Moreover, international students who struggle with SAT ERW will also likely struggle with college coursework that is almost entirely in English. The issue isn't with the SAT, nor is it with the colleges. If one wants to go to a primarily English-speaking college, it is the bare minimum that they are able to proficiently understand and utilize English.

Third, while students from wealthy families may score higher than students from poorer families, this is a systemic issue and not just one with the SAT. Wealthy students may also be able to participate in extracurriculars and/or contests that other students cannot, or may be able to afford tutors for their academic subjects as well. In essence, wealthy students simply have more resources than other students, and the SAT is not the only place in which this gap is reflected.

With more and more schools reverting test-optional policies, it is likely that soon even the UCs will transition away from the current test-blind policy. The SAT is by no means a perfect measure of a student's abilities, but is one that works and thus should still be considered.

To end off this blog, I'd like to ask you one final question: if we remove the SAT as part of the college admissions process in order to make them "fair" regardless of a student's background, what other parts of the application process would have to be removed? You will quickly find that once all the "unfair" parts of the application process are removed, there is nothing left at all on your paper - not even a name.
