---
title: "We Need To Think More"
slug: we-need-to-think
description: "We ALL need to spend more time just thinking in our daily lives."
date: 2026-02-25
---

# We Need To Think More
### 2026-02-25

When was the last time that you were able to truly settle down with your thoughts? Away from a computer screen, away from your phone, no background music, no distractions. Just you and your thoughts.

For many people, this could be a very difficult question to answer. From the moment we wake up, we're constantly bombarded with stimuli. The second we open our eyes, we check our phones. Did a friend text us? Did my teacher post a new assignment? Am I running late for work? When we drive, we focus on the road (hopefully), listen to music, and maybe even curse at other drivers for cutting us off. When we get home, we scroll through our phones while eating dinner, do homework or some unfinished work, and even before we sleep we scroll until we feel sleepy enough to put our phones down.

How realistic did that day sound to you? It may not match your exact routine, but I'd wager that most people can relate to this schedule. We rarely have any time truly by ourselves to just be with our thoughts. And yet, we complain about being overstimulated, about how we can't focus, about how we never feel creative anymore.

## What is "Thinking"?

By "thinking", I really mean just sitting down and letting your mind wander. Not necessarily solving a problem nor meditating, but just letting go of all distractions.

It may seem hard to enter this state, but given the right environment, it can be quite easy. Try this: leave your phone at home (or put it on do-not-disturb if you really need it for a hopefully legitimate reason), go outside, and just take a walk around your block. Don't listen to music, don't check your phone, just walk. You'll probably start thinking about random things - maybe a bug you couldn't figure out, or a way to optimize a project, or maybe even just a random memory. This here is the state of "thinking" that I'm referring to.

## Why is it important?


