---
title: "1.5 - Tips"
slug: tips
description: "Tips for you if you want to develop a chess engine"
date: 2025-07-12
---

# Tips
### 2025-07-12

Chess engine development is, frankly, a pretty expensive and time-consuming hobby. SPRTs can take days upon days to finish, and often people will rent servers.

I personally had to break the bank to get a 56-core server to run my tests, and I often still have to wait at least a day for my tests to finish. So, here are some tips to make your life easier:

- Chess engines aren't everything. If you want to take a break, do it! You don't have to work on your engine every day. Go outside!
- You don't have to beat Stockfish. It's okay to have a weaker engine! The goal is to have fun and learn something new. If you want to improve your engine, that's great, but don't feel pressured to be the best.
- Don't go into engine development with the goal of improving at chess. Uh, I probably don't have to say this but your engine improving does not translate into you improving. A ton of engine devs that I've met are in the low 1000s, and their engines are way stronger than mine, even though I'm rated 2300.
- Implement first, tune later. I didn't properly tune my engine until I had reached 3200 Elo, and even then it was arguably too early. Tuning is a waste of time until you actually have variables to tune.
- **Test. Every. Change.** I cannot stress this enough. If you don't test your changes, you will never know if they actually improve your engine or not.
