---
title: "11 - Futility Pruning"
slug: fp
description: "Skipping unlikely moves"
date: 2025-07-04
---

# Futility Pruning
### 2025-07-04

Our engine is now at a decent level. But, if you look closely, you will see that it still searches a lot of positions that are kind of not worth searching. For example, if we are 1 move away from the horizon and are -500cp below alpha, there's really no reason to continue this search.

This is where we use *futility pruning*. Futility pruning is a technique (applied near the horizon) where we skip searching positions that are unlikely to improve our score.

Futility pruning is a kind of "move-loop pruning", meaning that we skip searching moves that are unlikely to improve our score. Essentially, if the evaluation of the position plus a margin is still less than alpha, and the move is quiet, we can skip it.

We should not apply futility pruning at positions where:
- We are in check
- The current move being searched is a capture or promotion (can raise score significantly)
- We are not near the horizon
- We are near mate (since FP can lead to missing mates)
- The current move being searched is the hash move

```cpp
if (!in_check && !is_capt && !is_promo && m_idx > 0 && depth == 1 && abs(alpha) < VALUE_MATE_MAX_PLY && abs(beta) < VALUE_MATE_MAX_PLY) {
	// Futility pruning
	if (raw_eval + FP_MARGIN < alpha) continue;
}
```

The value you should use for `FP_MARGIN` is usually around 200-300cp, but you can experiment with this value to find the best one for your engine.

We can also employ futility pruning at higher depths, but the margin should be much larger. It does gain ELO for me, so it's worth trying!

```
Elo   | 3.08 +- 2.48 (95%)
SPRT  | 8.0+0.08s Threads=1 Hash=32MB
LLR   | 2.95 (-2.94, 2.94) [0.00, 5.00]
Games | N: 31396 W: 7625 L: 7347 D: 16424
Penta | [702, 3526, 7016, 3700, 754]
```
https://sscg13.pythonanywhere.com/test/419/

## Late Move Pruning

Similar to futility pruning, we can also skip searching moves that are ordered near the very back of our move list. This is called late move pruning (LMP)!

```cpp
if (m_idx > 5 + depth * depth && !in_check && !capt && !promo) {
	continue;
}
```

It's pretty intuitive and not too difficult to implement. You can play around with the formula to find which one works best for you.

```
Elo   | 8.09 +- 5.07 (95%)
SPRT  | 8.0+0.08s Threads=1 Hash=32MB
LLR   | 2.90 (-2.25, 2.89) [0.00, 5.00]
Games | N: 6226 W: 1568 L: 1423 D: 3235
Penta | [78, 681, 1461, 804, 89]
```
https://sscg13.pythonanywhere.com/test/548/

## History Pruning

We've been using history tables for move ordering so far, but we can also use them to prune off some moves! Essentially, if a move has a really terrible history value, we can skip it, since it has consistently not been a good move.

```cpp
if (history[board.side][move.from()][move.to()] < -2000 * depth) continue;
```

It really doesn't get much simpler than this.

```
Elo   | 20.82 +- 8.48 (95%)
SPRT  | 8.0+0.08s Threads=1 Hash=32MB
LLR   | 2.94 (-2.25, 2.89) [0.00, 5.00]
Games | N: 2122 W: 556 L: 429 D: 1137
Penta | [18, 207, 494, 314, 28]
```
https://sscg13.pythonanywhere.com/test/562/
