---
title: "3.5 - Intuitive Alpha-Beta"
slug: intuitiveab
description: "Actually understanding alpha-beta"
date: 2026-02-01
---

# Intuitive Alpha-Beta
### 2026-02-01

In order to be a successful engine developer, it is extremely important that you be acquainted with the details of alpha-beta pruning. This will both help you understand pruning methods but also help you debug your engine when things go wrong. I personally couldn't say that I fully understood alpha-beta until around 5 months of engine development, but once I did, everything else made a lot more sense.

As previously mentioned, $\alpha$ is the best score that we can guarantee for ourselves, and $\beta$ is the best score that our opponent will allow us to achieve. Let's talk about the three possible outcomes for a score $s$:

### $s \leq \alpha$

We call this a fail-low. This means that the move we just searched is worse than our current established alternative. Therefore, we change nothing and continue searching other nodes. In other words, this move is not the best move.

It is important to note that some nodes may only have moves that fail-low. Not to worry - this doesn't mean that there are no good moves in the position. It simply means that this entire position is worse than our current alternative. This is called an all-node, a node where we need to search every move to prove that none of them are better than our current alternative.

All children of all-nodes are expected cut-nodes.

### $s \geq \beta$

We call this a fail-high. Basically, the move we searched is so good that our opponent would not let us reach this position. So, we can stop immediately and return this score. Even if there are better moves (with a higher score), we don't care because we already found one that proves our opponent wouldn't let this happen.

Remember, we are using the negamax framework, so the best move in a node would be the move with the highest score. If we already establish that there exists *a* move $s \geq \beta$, we know for sure that the true score of the position $s' \geq s \geq \beta$, so we can cut directly.

This is called a cut-node, a node where we ideally can prune the search after searching only one move.

All children of cut-nodes are expected all-nodes.

### $\alpha < s < \beta$

This is called a PV-node (principal variation node). When we find a score in this range, we update $\alpha$ to this new score, this being our new best move.

These nodes are the most important nodes because they dictate the best line of play. Therefore, we avoid most pruning heuristics on expected PV-nodes so as to not mess everything up.

The first child of a PV-node is expected to be another PV-node, whereas the rest of the children are expected cut-nodes.

Note that perspective may be confusing here - if, in the parent node, we expect a move to have a score $s \leq \alpha$, the child node is actually an expected cut-node, since the score is negated.

## So what?

Let's consider some of the implications of each node type.

All-nodes require the most computational effort, because we must search every move to prove none of them raise $\alpha$. Therefore, we often do not do many node-level pruning heuristics on fail-low scores, and when we do, we generally do them after a reduced search (e.g. razoring).

Cut-nodes are the easiest nodes to search, and are therefore also where we can do the most pruning. Since we only need to find one move that raises $\beta$, we can be very aggressive with our pruning heuristics regarding fail-high scores, because there's probably at least one move that does fail high.

On the contrary, we want to avoid nearly all pruning heuristics in PV-nodes. Since they affect our search result a lot, it would be dangerous to prune them unsoundly. That's why most heuristics (e.g. RFP, NMP) are disabled in PV-nodes. We can still do some heuristics (e.g. LMR), but in general we do less.

## Additional resources

For diagrams and a much better explanation, I highly suggest you check out [expositor.dev](https://expositor.dev/alpha-beta)
