---
title: "3.5 - Node Types"
slug: nodetypes
description: "PV, Cut, and All nodes"
date: 2025-09-20
---

# Node Types
### 2025-09-20

We talked about alpha-beta, but what's going to be very important soon is the concept of a *PV-node*. But what are PV-nodes?

## Recap of alpha-beta theory

In alpha-beta search, we have two values: alpha and beta. Alpha is the best score that we have found so far, and beta is the best score that our opponent will allow us to achieve. If we find a move that is better than beta, we can immediately stop searching this position, because our opponent will never allow this to happen. If we find a move that is better than alpha (but not better than beta), we update alpha to this new value since we found a new best line.

Note that if we find a move worse than alpha, we do nothing since we already have a better move, and this result doesn't prove anything new.

## PV-nodes

A PV-node (principal variation node) is a node where we find a move that is better than alpha but worse than beta. These are the most important nodes, since they dictate the best line of play. So, we often cannot (or should not) use pruning heuristics on these nodes.

In an ideal move ordering scheme, the PV-node is always the first child of a PV-node.

## Cut-nodes

A cut-node is a node where we find a move that is better than beta - or in other words, perform a beta cutoff. Unfortunately, we can't know if a node is a cut-node until we find a move that causes a beta cutoff. So, for the rest of these guides, whenever I say "cut-node", I really mean "expected cut-node".

In an ideal move ordering scheme, cut-nodes are children of all-nodes, and are siblings of PV-nodes.

Cut-nodes are the easiest to prune, and are generally what most of our pruning heuristics will target.

## All-nodes

An all-node is a node where no move is better than alpha. In this case, we have to search *all* moves to prove that none of them are better than alpha (hence the name).

In an ideal move ordering scheme, all-nodes are children of cut-nodes.

In general, all-nodes are difficult to prune because we *should* be searching all moves to prove that they're all worse than alpha.

## Additional resources

For diagrams and a much better explanation, I highly suggest you check out [expositor.dev](https://expositor.dev/alpha-beta)
